Texte : « Rights » are a moral concept - the concept that provides a logical transition from the principles guiding an individual's actions to the principles guiding his relationship with others. -- the concept that preserves and protects individual morality in a social context - the link between the moral code of a man and the legal code of a society, between ethics and politics. […]A « right » is a moral principle defining and sanctioning a man's freedom of action in a social context. There is only one fundamental right (all the others are its consequences or corollaries) : a man's right to his own life. Life is a process of self-sustaining and self-generated action ; the right to life means the right to engage in self-sustaining and self-generated action—which means: the freedom to take all the actions required by the nature of a rational being for the support, the furtherance, the fulfillment and the enjoyment of his own life. (Such is the meaning of the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.)The concept of a 'right' pertains only to action - specifically, to freedom of action. It means freedom from physical compulsion, coercion or interference by other men.Thus, for every individual, a right is the moral sanction of a positive - of his freedom to act on his own judgment, for his own goals, by his own voluntary, uncoerced choice. As to his neighbours, his rights impose no obligations on them except of a negative kind: to abstain from violating his rights.The right to life is the source of all rights - and the right to property is their only implementation. Without property rights, no other rights are possible. Since man has to sustain his life by his own effort, the man who has no right to the product of his effort has no means to sustain his life. The man who produces while others dispose of his product, is a slave.Bear in mind that the right to property is a right to action, like all others: it is not the right to an object, but the action and the consequences of producing or earning that object. It is not a guarantee that a man will earn any property, but only a guarantee that he will own it if he earns it. It is the right to gain, to keep, to use and to dispose of material values.The concept of individual rights is so new in human history that most men have not grasped it fully to this day. In accordance with the two theories of ethics, the mystical and the social, some men assert that rights are a gift of god -- others, that rights are a gift of society. But, in fact, the source of rights is man's nature.
Auteur : Ayn Rand
Livre : Man's rights, 1963, in The virtue of selfishness, Signet, pp. 110-111.
